Docs Suggestions for Trie Logs (#1519)
hyperledger/besu-docs: docs/public-networks/how-to/bonsai-limit-trie-logs.md

---
title: Use Bonsai Tries to reduce database size
sidebar_position: 12
description: Enable this feature to reduce the size of your database
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Reduce database size

> You can use the the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` to minimize the database size of Besu, if you are using `data-storage-format=BONSAI`. When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3GB each week on mainnet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using the [Bonsai Trie](../concepts/data-storage-formats#bonsai-tries) data storage policy`, use the the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` to minimize the Besu database size. When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3GB each week on mainnet.
```

To use this feature before it is enabled by default, add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to your Besu command.

## Limit Trie Logs for Bonsai

:::caution

> The following commands are examples. Before executing these example commands on your node, m,modify them to apply to your node's configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following commands are examples. Before executing these example commands on your node, modify them to apply to your node's configuration.
```

:::

1. Add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to the [Besu configuration file](configuration-file).
1. Stop Besu.

> 1. (optional) Run the following command to run the Besu client for the Bonsai data storage format, specifying a data directory for pruned trie logs:

Reviewer: Suggest: "Run the Besu client and specify the Bonsai Trie data storage format and a data directory for the pruned trie logs:"

Then add a fenced code block for the command

   `sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune`
1. Restart Besu. If you're using a `systemd` service file, as recommended by [CoinCashew](https://www.coincashew.com/coins/overview-eth/guide-or-how-to-setup-a-validator-on-eth2-mainnet/part-i-installation/step-3-installing-execution-client/besu) and [Somer](https://someresat.medium.com/guide-to-staking-on-ethereum-ubuntu-teku-f09ecd9ef2ee), ensure you execute `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.
1. Look for `Limit trie logs enabled: retention: 512; prune window: 30000` in your Besu configuration printout at startup.

## Restart Besu

> When you restart Besu, it will begin pruning and remove unnecessary data, one block at a time. This process begins after an initial reduction in the database size during the initial startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Besu restarts, it will prune and remove unnecessary data, one block at a time. This process begins after an initial reduction in the database size during startup.
```

---
title: Use Bonsai Tries to reduce database size
sidebar_position: 12
description: Enable this feature to reduce the size of your database
tags:
  - public networks
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Reduce database size

You can use the the early access feature `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` to minimize the database size of Besu, if you are using `data-storage-format=BONSAI`. When enabled, this feature can reduce database growth by more than 3GB each week on mainnet.

To use this feature before it is enabled by default, add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to your Besu command.

## Limit Trie Logs for Bonsai

:::caution

The following commands are examples. Before executing these example commands on your node, m,modify them to apply to your node's configuration.

:::

1. Add the `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` option to the [Besu configuration file](configuration-file).
1. Stop Besu.
1. (optional) Run: 

> `sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune`

Reviewer 2: SNAP here as well

If you have a long-running node, this will not immediately clear your backlog of trie logs in the same way that resyncing does. Instead of resyncing, in order to do this we’re providing a “run once” **offline** command to immediately **prune all your old trie logs in a few minutes or less**. Note, this requires Besu to be shutdown before running, but downtime will be minimal. You will **not** need to run this command a second time if you keep `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled`.

For minimal downtime, we recommend running this command **before** restarting Besu with `--Xbonsai-limit-trie-logs-enabled` (easiest to do it all at the same time).

If you followed Somer Esat’s (https://someresat.medium.com/guide-to-staking-on-ethereum-ubuntu-teku-f09ecd9ef2ee ) or CoinCashew’s guide (https://www.coincashew.com/coins/overview-eth/guide-or-how-to-setup-a-validator-on-eth2-mainnet/part-i-installation/step-3-installing-execution-client/besu) then you likely have these options set in your `besu.service` or `execution.service` systemd file:

```
...
ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu \
...

>   --sync-mode=X_SNAP \

Reviewer 2: Needs to be SNAP, as we will release this alongside SNAP default.

>   --sync-mode=X_SNAP \

Reviewer 2: Needs to be SNAP, as we will release this alongside SNAP default.

2024-02-02 05:46:10.222+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(0): 0xcd50706da7f6f2db7f9d54f3589122760900d9ab2508c20a4ca40b496d930368
... 
2024-02-02 05:46:10.336+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Key(511): 0x238f9649b59616430ad7e43b8f3cf65bc97cac4aa54a3eddf3ad6ee666ce733e
2024-02-02 05:46:10.441+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogHelper | Deleting files...
2024-02-02 05:46:10.446+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Finished pruning. Re-estimating trie logs size...
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Estimated trie logs size after pruning: 0 B (0 B estimate is normal when using default settings)
2024-02-02 05:46:11.023+00:00 | main | INFO  | TrieLogSubCommand | Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
Prune ran successfully. We estimate you freed up 9 GiB!
```

If you are using a TOML config file, then you can simply do something like:

`sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --config-file=besu-config.toml storage x-trie-log prune`

## Troubleshoot

### Troubleshoot common errors

The prune command should look like the following for mainnet users:

> `sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune`

Reviewer 2: SNAP

Ensure you stop Besu before running the command.

---

`java.lang.IllegalArgumentException: Subcommand only works with data-storage-format=BONSAI`

Are you missing --data-storage-format=BONSAI? It must be add before the storage subcommand, i.e.

> `sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --data-path=/var/lib/besu --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune`

Reviewer 2: SNAP

---

`java.lang.RuntimeException: Column handle not found for segment TRIE_BRANCH_STORAGE`

Did you specify the `data-path`?

> `sudo /usr/local/bin/besu/bin/besu --data-path=/var/lib/besu --data-storage-format=BONSAI --sync-mode=X_SNAP storage x-trie-log prune`

Reviewer 2: SNAP
